CS 1050, Mr. Kramer     	         Programming Assignment #6	 	# of pts: 40

Purpose	Calculate a triangle area and perimeter using Java classes. This builds on the ideas in Assignment #2.

Due Date	Per the Course at a Glance. Can be resubmitted.

Submissions	In this order: printed copy of the source code with line numbers of both source files (main program and the class), and a screen print showing the output. You will type in three numbers that are the lengths of the sides of a triangle and show the output.

Java Topics	Java classes, if statements, calculating area and perimeter.

References	Textbook – use the index for relevant topics; PowerPoint slides.

Specification

This program is a revision of Programming Assignment #2 to use a separate class. See the handout: Interactive Average with a Class and Interactive Average Main as a model.

Write a separate Java class for a triangle named YourName_S_06_Triangle that will have three private instance variables of type double for the lengths of the sides of a triangle.  This Java class should contain these methods:

1.	A constructor that initializes the instance variables to default values of 0. This Constructor has no parameters
2.	A constructor with three parameters that initializes the instance variables to the parameter values.
3.	A method for the user to input the lengths of the sides of a triangle. Include prompts. Allow values only greater than 0
4.	A method that outputs the lengths of the sides of the triangle along with a message
5.	A method that returns the perimeter of the triangle
6.	A method that returns the area of the triangle

This class should be placed in a file that is separate from the class containing the main program. Note: Only method #2 has parameters. As is typical in a class, the rest of the class methods do not have parameters.

Write a Java application main program in Java file YourName_S_06 in the order specified below. This code will be in a file that is separate from the one for the Triangle class above. Note that the main method should have perimeter and area as local variables.

1.	Call a void method that outputs an explanation of what the program does.  Include in the explanation that this program uses a class for the sides of a triangle and include your name.

2.	Get the lengths of the sides from the user. Use the method from the Triangle class.

3.	Calculate the perimeter of the triangle. Use the method from the Triangle class.

4.	Calculate the area of the triangle. Use the method from the Triangle class.

5.	Use a void method to output, with appropriate messages: The lengths of the sides of the triangle (use the method from the Triangle class), the perimeter of the triangle, and the area of the triangle.

The style of your code should be similar to that of Interactive Average with a Class.  Be sure to include comments – programmer identification, assignment number, section number as appropriate, purpose, and a brief explanation of the methods should appear in the header comment, along with the vocabulary word and quote. Include an explanation for all variables, parameters and methods.

