CS 1050, Mr. Kramer        		Programming Assignment #5        	   # of pts: 40

Purpose		Calculate area of a triangle using methods. This assignment builds on the ideas in Assignment #2.

Due Date	Per the Course at a Glance. Can be resubmitted.

Submissions	In this order: printed copy of the source code with line numbers and a screen print showing the input and output. You will type in three numbers that are the lengths of the sides of a triangle and show the output.

				Note:	if you are handing in a revision, hand in the original graded version(s) and put the newer revised version on top.

Java Topics	methods, if statements, calculating area and perimeter.

References	Textbook – use the index for relevant topics; PowerPoint slides.

Specification

This program is a revision of Programming Assignment #2 to use methods. We will discuss Assignment #1, Interactive Average with Methods, as a model.

Write a Java program and methods in the order listed below.

Declare the variables for the sides of the triangle, perimeter, and area inside the main method and use them as appropriate to call the methods.

1.	Call a void method that will output an explanation of what the program does.  Include in the explanation that this program uses methods and include your name.

2.	Prompt for the input of three real numbers – use type double – these will be the lengths of the sides of a triangle. Input the three sides and ensure the numbers are greater than 0. Use one method to read and return the value of a side so you will call this method three times. Note: use the style of Program Assignment #1 for the input.

3.	Calculate the perimeter of the triangle. The perimeter is the sum of the lengths.  Use a method to calculate the perimeter. It will have three parameters (the sides of the triangle).  Then, use a method to calculate the area of the triangle – it will have three parameters (the sides of the triangle) -- use Heron’s formula:
				   _________________
			A = √ s(s – a)(s – b) (s – c)	    where

	s is 1/2 of the perimeter and is a local variable, and a, b, and c represent the lengths of the sides of the triangle.

Use the predefined class Math and the method  Math.sqrt  to calculate the square root. Usage:     value = Math.sqrt(an expression)

4.	Use a void method to output, with appropriate messages: 
	The lengths of the sides of the triangle,
	The perimeter of the triangle, and
	The area of the triangle.
	Note that this method requires five parameters.

As before, include comments – programmer identification, assignment number, section, purpose, explanation for all variables, parameters, and methods, and the vocabulary word and quote. See documentation standards.

